---
layout: project
title: Self-supervised Structured Causal Disentanglement
subtitle: Can Latent Variable Model Disentangle Causal Factors Without Supervision?
---
Causal disentanglement has great potential for capturing complex situations. However, there is a lack of practical and efficient approaches. It is already known that most unsupervised disentangling methods are unable to produce identifiable results without additional information, often leading to randomly disentangled output. Therefore, most existing models for disentangling are weakly supervised, providing information about intrinsic factors, which incurs excessive costs. Therefore, we propose a novel model, *SCADI(SElf-supervised CAusal DIsentanglement)*, that enables the model to discover semantic factors and learn their causal relationships without any supervision. This model combines a masked structural causal model (SCM) with a pseudo-label generator for causal disentanglement, aiming to provide a new direction for self-supervised causal disentanglement models.

{%
	include image_with_caption.html
	url="/assets/projects/2023_SCADI/learning.png"
	width="60%"
%}

SCADI has two main components: 1. An **observer** performs dimension-wise unsupervised disentangling through a latent variable model, generating pseudo-labels. 2. An **interpreter** is a module for vector-wise weakly supervised causal disentanglement. It relies on the structured causal model (SCM). SCM has played a significant role in incorporating causality into latent variable models, such as in CausalVAE, which serves as the baseline for \textit{interpreter}, as well as various other models. To summarize our contribution, the **interpreter** is supervised by the labels generated by the **observer**, while the **observer** receives additional regularization from the **interpreter**, which forces the adjacency matrix in masked SCM to be a directed acyclic graph (DAG).

{%
	include image_with_caption.html
	url="/assets/projects/2023_SCADI/scadi.png"
	width="100%"
%}
<!-- **Read the [full paper]({{"/assets/publications/2016_human_atlas/paper.pdf" | prepend: site.baseurl }}).**

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OQOUHkJdA-U" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe> -->